---
layout: post
title: Reading summaries - week twelve, Fall 2017
published: true
---

Class themes this week were _ _ in SP. There is no SHRM class this week due to the Thanksgiving holiday.

> ## Table of contents
>
> ### Strategic Planning
> * [Bryson, Chapter 10 - ](#bryson-chapter-9---implementing-strategies-and-plans-successfully)
> * [The Leader's New Work, Senge (2006)](# )
> * [Designing Performancestat, Behn (2008)](#designing-performancestat-behn-2008)
> * [Introduction to Performance Measurement and the Balanced Scorecard, Niven (2008)](#introduction-to-performance-measurement-and-the-balanced-scorecard-niven-2008)

## Strategic Planning (SP)

### Bryson, Chapter 10 -

*

### The Leader's New Work, Senge (2006)

* "To become a leader, you must first become a human being/ said Confucius, more than twenty-five hundred years ago
* wisdom itself is one of the oldest ideas associated with leadership
* this perspective on leading has almost been lost
* We encode a broader message when we refer to top management as leaders. The message is that the only people with power to bring about change are those at the top of the hierarchy.
* We began to think in terms of an "ecology of leadership"
* Without effective local line leaders, new ideas-no matter how compelling-do not get translated into action
* new view of leadership in learning organizations centers on subtler and more important tasks.
* three fundamental roles characterize all leaders' work: In a learning organization, leaders are designers, teachers, and stewards
  * <b>Leader as designer</b>
    * Leaders who appreciate organizations as living systems approach design work differently.
    * what it means to be a "designer" of learning infrastructures. First, one must recognize that an important need for communication and learning is not being met Then, have the courage and imagination to break the mold, to do something very different to meet that need
    * **in the role of designer, a leader must be willing to allow others to continue to evolve the infrastructures to suit their own situations and not to feel the need to control the process**
    * IT infrastructures
      * The same leadership in iterative design comes into play with more popular communication infrastructures
      * Leadership in designing IT-based infrastructures starts with designing the composition of the team responsible for implementation.
      * The same thinking needs to guide more novel learning infrastructures
    * Seeing design as part of a living system applies equally to more subtle design tasks, like the "design" of guiding ideas.
    * while it is common for management teams to come up with vision and mission statements, understanding that people interpret and behave with such statements in many different ways leads to different strategies.
    * When you approach the design of guiding ideas with this in mind, several things happen:
      * First, you worry less about getting the words right and more about using the words to engage people.
      * Second, you are prepared to take longer to develop statements of guiding ideas.
      * Third, you focus on how the guiding ideas are used
    * A focus on getting the words right leads to beautiful, even inspiring, vision statements the produce little or no change.
    * see visions and other guiding ideas as tools for mobilizing and focusing energy
    * **judge ideas by their impact, not by how they sound**
    * guiding ideas are always works in progress
    * The hallmark of good design is the absence of crisis. And as such often goes unnoticed.
  * <b>Leader as teacher</b>
    * A great teacher is someone around whom others learn
    * **Create space for learning and invite people into that space**
    * leaders' work as teachers often starts with their recognition of an important capacity that is lacking in an organization
    * help people see problems in terms of underlying systemic structures and mental models rather than just short-term events
    * **Developing systems thinking capabilities takes time and patience**
    * To be a true teacher, you must be a learner first.
    * point that leaders need to be learners seems obvious, its implications can take time to hit home-especially for highly committed people
  * <b>Leader as steward</b>
    * The idea of leaders who serve those they lead may seem idealistic, but it is also pragmatic
    * Stewardship is about serving a larger purpose
    * Many otherwise competent managers in leadership positions are not leaders of the same ilk precisely because they have no larger story
    * Change leaders often forget to ask a powerful question: "What do we seek to conserve?"
    * When leaders consciously apply this principle, they usually discover that **people seek to conserve identity and relationships**
    * personal ambition can compromise results achieved whether or not there is outright management malfeasance
    * When positional authority leads managers to invest energy in protecting or expanding turf, it comes at the expense of focusing on actual results
    * Stewardship is, in the words of one of the young Roca street workers, ultimately about "doing what is right for the whole."
    * brings with it a shift in our relationship to our personal vision. It ceases to be a possession. We become a steward of the vision.
    * **What distinguishes outstanding leaders is the clarity and persuasiveness of their ideas, the depth of their commitment, and the extent of their openness to continually learning more.**
    * also seems to be one commonality that transcends differences in how outstanding leaders go about their work: the principle of creative tension
    * **truly effective leaders seem to come to a shared appreciation of the power of holding a vision and concurrently looking deeply and honestly at current reality**
    * People who are truly leading seem rarely to think of themselves in that way. Their focus is invariably on what needs to be done, the larger system in which they are operating, and the people with whom they are creating-not on themselves as "leaders."
