---
layout: post
title: Reading summaries - week eight, Fall 2017
published: true
---

.

## Strategic Planning (SP)

### Bryson, Chapter 6 - Identifying Strategic Issues Facing the Organization

* Identifying strategic issues is the heart of the strategic planning process.
* a strategic issue is a fundamental policy question or challenge affecting an organization’s mandates, mission and values, product or service level and mix, clients or users, cost, financing, organization, or management.
* purpose is therefore to identify the fundamental policy questions-the _strategic issue agenda_
* The way these questions are framed can have a profound effect on the creation of ideas for strategic action
* If strategic planning is in part about the construction of a new social reality, then this step outlines the basic paths along which that drama might unfold
* An organization’s mission often is explicitly or implicitly identified as an issue during this phase.
* The organization’s culture will affect which issues get on the agenda and how they are framed,
* The need to change the organization’s culture may thus become a strategic issue
* **every major strategy change will also involve a cultural change**
* Two, strategic issues are important because issues play a central role in political decision making.
* With carefully framed issues, subsequent choices, decisions, and actions are more likely to be politically acceptable,
* Virtually every strategic issue involves conflicts:
* whether the conflict draws people together or pulls them apart, participants will feel heightened emotion and concern
* very important, therefore, that people feel enough psychological safety to explore potentially threatening situations,
* An effective strategic planning coordinating committee and strategic planning team will provide these necessary supports.
* The agenda is a product of three prior outcomes.
  * a list of the issues faced by the organization.
  * division of the list into two broad categories: strategic and operational.
    * strategic issues are likely to involve more need for knowledge exploration
    * operational issues are more technical in nature
  * an arrangement of the strategic issues in some sort of order: priority, logical, or temporal.
* A number of additional outcomes ensue from the identification of strategic issues. First, attention is focused on what is truly important.
* are three different kinds of strategic issues:
  1. issues where no action is required at present, but that must be continuously monitored
  1. issues that can be handled as part of the organization’s regular strategic planning cycle
  1. issues that require an immediate response.
* second desirable outcome is that attention is focused on issues, not answers.
* identification of issues usually creates the kind of useful tension necessary to prompt organizational change.
  * Strategic issues that emerge from the juxtaposition of internal and external factors can provide just the kind of tension that will focus the attention of key decision makers on the need for change
* strategic issue identification should provide useful clues about how to resolve the issue.
* if the strategic planning process has not been *real* to participants previously, it will become real for them now.
  * The more people realize that strategic planning can be quite real in its consequences, the more seriously they will take
  * A crisis of trust or a test of courage may thus occur, and lead to a turning point in the organization’s character.
* A point worth emphasizing when it comes to strategic issue identification is that *major issues are always likely to involve information technology*, human resources, and financial management aspects.
* *Information technology, in particular, is assuming almost paramount importance* for organizations moving into e-commerce and e-government
* **It is imperative that issues involving information technology, human resources, and financial management be addressed in such a way that they support the organization’s overall mission and efforts to meet its mandates and create public value.**
* An adequate strategic issue description
  1. phrases the issue as a question the organization can do something about and that has more than one answer
  1. discusses the confluence of factors (mission, mandates, and internal and external environmental aspects, or SWOC/Ts) that make the issue strategic
  1. articulates the consequences of not addressing the issue.
* There are several reasons why the issue should be phrased as a question the organization can do something about.
  * First, if there is nothing the organization can do about a situation, then there is no strategic issue. This apparent issue, in other words, is really a condition or constraint.
  * effective strategic planning has an action orientation. If strategic planning does not produce useful decisions and actions, then it probably was a waste of time—although
* focusing on what the organization can do helps it attend to what it controls, instead of worrying pointlessly about what it does not.
* organizations should focus their most precious resource—the attention of key decision makers—on issues they can do something about.
* Articulating strategic issues as challenges the organization can do something about should help the organization strongly influence the way issues get framed and what might be done about them.
* Strategic issues thus typically—or at least ideally—are not _current_ problems or crises
* strategic issues are typically complex and potentially destructive if not satisfactorily resolved.
* several reasons why the issue should be phrased as a challenge that has more than one solution.
  * id a question has only one answer, it is probably not really an issue, but a choice about whether to pursue a specific solution
  * chances are increased that strategic issues will not be confused with strategies,
  * Innovative or radical answers may not be chosen, but they almost always should be considered,
* Attention to the factors that make an issue strategic is important both to clarify the issue and to establish the outlines of potential strategies to resolve the issue
* Strategic issues arise in three kinds of situations.
  * First, they can arise when events beyond the control of the organization make or will make it difficult or impossible to accomplish basic objectives
  * Second, they can arise when technology, cost, financing, staffing, management, or political choices for achieving basic objectives change or soon will.
  * Finally, they arise when changes in mission, mandates, or internal or external factors suggest present or future opportunities to:
    1. make significant improvements in the quantity or quality of products or services delivered
    1. achieve significant reductions in the cost of providing products or services
    1. introduce new products or services
    1. combine, reduce, or eliminate certain products or services
    1. in general create more public value
  * Finally, there should be a statement of the consequences of failure to address the issue.
* Once a list of strategic issues has been prepared, it is possible to figure out just how strategic each issue is.
* Two methods for doing so: use of a “litmus test” and construction of an “issue-precedence diagram”
* At least eight approaches to the identification of strategic issues are possible:
  * _direct approach_
    * probably the most useful
    * Planners go straight from a review of mandatres, mission, and SWOC/T to the identification of strategic issues
    * The direct approach is best if (1) there is no agreement on goals, or the goals on which there is agreement are too abstract to be useful; (2) there is no preexisting vision of success, and developing a consensually based vision will be difficult; (3) there is no hierarchical authority that can impose goals on the other stakeholders; or (4) the environment is so turbulent that development of goals or visions seems unwise
  * _goals approach_
    * more in keeping with traditional planning theory
    * organization first establishes goals and objectives, then goes on to identify issues
    * For the approach to work, fairly broad and deep agreement on the organization’s goals and objectives must be possible,
    * This approach also is more likely to work in organizations with hierarchical authority structures
    * externally imposed mandates may embody goals that can drive the identification of strategic issues or development of strategies.
    * the approach is likely to work for communities that are relatively homogeneous and have a basic consensus on values
  * _vision of success_
    * the organization is asked to develop a “best” picture of the organization in the future
    * The vision of success approach is most useful when it is particularly important to take a holistic approach to the organization and its strategies
    * This approach is more likely to apply to nonprofit organizations than to public organizations, as public organizations are usually more tightly constrained by mandates and conflicting expectations of numerous stakeholders.
  * _indirect approach_
    * particularly useful when major strategic redirection is necessary but many members of the planning team and organization have not yet grasped the need,
    * method starts with the participants’ existing system of ideas, helps them elaborate
    * participants _socially construct_ a new reality, which allows them to convince themselves of the need for change
    * Innovation thus is more a consequence of recombination than mutation
  * _action-oriented strategy mapping_
    * involves creation of word-and-arrow diagrams in which statements about potential actions the organization might take, how they might be taken, and why, are linked by arrows indicating the cause-effect or influence relationships
    * particularly useful when participants are having trouble making sense of complex issue areas, time is short, the emphasis must be on action, and commitment on the part of those involved is particularly important.
    * Participants simply brainstorm possible actions, cluster them according to similar themes, and then figure out what causes what. The result is an issue map
    * may also be called _causal mapping_
  * _alignment_
    * helps clarify where there are gaps, inconsistencies, or conflicts among the various elements of an organization’s governance, management, and operating policies, systems, and procedures.
    * based on the assumption that superior (or even just good) organizational performance requires reasonable (or better) coherence
    * approach thus works well in tandem with all of the other approaches.
  * _issue tensions_
    * four basic tensions around any strategic issue:
      1. human resources, and especially _equity_ concerns
      1. _innovation and change_
      1. maintenance of _tradition_
      1. _productivity improvements_
    * critiquing the way issues are framed using these tensions separately and in combination in order to find the best way to frame the issue.
    tensions approach can be used by itself or in conjunction with any of the other
    * Taking the extra time to critique an issue statement using the tensions approach is advisable when the costs of getting the issue framing wrong are quite high, or when there is a lot of uncertainty around what the issue actually is
  * _systems analysis_
    * can be used to help discern the best way to frame issues when the issue area may be conceptualized as a system, and the system contains complex feedback effects that must be modeled in order to understand the system
    * **The more complicated the system, the more difficult it is to model**
    * Considerable wisdom is required to know when it is worth attempting sophisticated analyses, which analysts to use, and how to interpret and make use of the results.
* The following process guidelines should prove helpful as a strategic planning team identifies the strategic issues its organization faces:
  * Review the mandates, mission, strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and challenges
  * Select an approach to strategic issue identification that fits the organization’s situation
    * serious misalignments may emerge as strategic issues, and planning team members should be alert to the possibility
  * Once a list of issues has been prepared, try to separate them into strategic and operational issues
  * It may be helpful to use a “litmus test” to develop some measure of just how “strategic” an issue is.
  * Once strategic issues have been identified they should be sequenced in either a priority, logical, or temporal order as a prelude to strategy development in the next step.
  * There is a real art to framing strategic issues
    * likely to seem rather messy at times as people struggle
    * If the organization’s mission is itself a strategic issue, the organization should expect to develop a second set of issues after the mission is reexamined.
    * It is important to critique strategic issues to be sure that they really do usefully frame the fundamental policy questions the organization faces.
    * especially important to remember that strategic issues framed in single-function terms will be dealt with by single-function departments or agencies. Strategic issues that are framed in multifunctional terms will have to be addressed by more than one department.
    * **Strategic planners can gain enormous influence over the strategic planning process and its outcomes if the issues are framed in such a way that decision makers must share power in order to resolve the issues.**
  * Remember that there are likely to be at least three kinds of strategic issues in terms of the attention they require; each will need to be treated differently.
    1. those that require no action at present, but must be monitored;
    1. those that can be handled as part of the organization’s regular strategic planning cycle;
    1. those that require urgent attention and must be handled out of sequence with the organization’s regular strategic planning cycle.
  * Reach an agreement among key decision makers that a major fraction of their time together will be devoted to the identification and resolution of strategic issues.
  * Keep it light
    * important for members of the strategic planning team to keep a sense of humor, acknowledge emotions, and release tensions
  * Notwithstanding efforts to keep things light, remember that participants may fall into the pit or hit the wall
  * Agreement on strategic issues to be addressed in the next step is likely to mark an important organizational decision point.
    * Identifying the fundamental challenges the organization faces will have a profound effect on the actual choices made and ultimately on the viability and success of the organization.
  * Managing the transition to the next step in the process—strategy development—is crucial.
    * conflicts or choices embodied in the issues may seem too difficult or disruptive to address. Strong leadership and commitment to the strategic planning process must be exercised
* At the end of this step key decision makers should agree on a _strategic issue agenda_—the set of strategic issues to be addressed, arranged in priority, logical, or temporal order.
* The transition to the next step in the process will require careful management. It is one thing to talk about what is fundamental, quite another to take action based on those discussions.

### SHRM optional readings - week 7

#### P
