---
layout: post
title: Reading summaries - Management and Governance of Nonprofit Organizations - week ten, Spring 2018
published: true
---

Class themes were _Information Technologies, Digital Transformation, Making Decisions about IT_ in IDSC and _Governance and the Work of the Board_ in MNGPO

> ## Table of contents
>
> ### IDSC
> *
>
> ### MNGPO
> * [Chapter 8, Managing Nonprofit Organizations, Tschirhart and Bielefeld (2012)](#chapter-8-managing-nonprofit-organizations-tschirhart-and-bielefeld-2012)
> * [Chapter 11, Managing Nonprofit Organizations, Tschirhart and Bielefeld (2012)](#chapter-11-managing-nonprofit-organizations-tschirhart-and-bielefeld-2012)

## IDSC

### McAffee, A. Mastering the Three Worlds of Information Technology. Harvard Business Review, November 2006

* American companies spend as much on IT each year as they do on offices, warehouses, and factories put together
* One of the biggest problems companies face is coping with the abundance of technologies in the marketplace
* Adding to executives’ diffidence, corporate IT projects have often delivered underwhelming results or been outright failures
* survey of 782 American executives responsible for IT, 50% of the respondents admitted that “aligning business and IT strategy” was a major problem
* managers who distance themselves from IT abdicate a critical responsibility
* executives have three roles to play:
  * help select technologies
  * nurture their adoption
  * ensure their exploitation
* Different types of IT result in different kinds of organizational change
* **What’s critical, though, is that executives stop looking at IT projects as technology installations and start looking at them as periods of organizational change that they have a responsibility to manage**
* One way to build a comprehensive model is to place IT in a historical context. IT is the latest in a series of general-purpose technologies (GPTs), innovations so important that they cause jumps in an economy’s normal march of progress
* Research suggests that four organizational complements—better-skilled workers, higher levels of teamwork, redesigned processes, and new decision rights—allow process GPTs to deliver improved performance
* Information technologies, my research shows, don’t enjoy the same relationships with the four organizational complements that other process GPTs have.
* IT sets off several kinds of revolutions in organizations because technologies fall into three distinct categories
* <b>Function IT</b>
  * technologies that make the execution of stand-alone tasks more efficient
  * Word processors and spreadsheets are the most common examples
  * People can get the most value from these technologies when their complements are in place but can also use FIT without all of the complements.
  * capabilities of this IT category:
    * Enhancing experimentation capacity
    * Increasing precision
* <b>Network IT</b>
  * provides a means by which people can communicate with one another
  * technologies include e-mail, instant messaging, blogs, and groupware
  * allows people to interact, but it doesn’t define how they should interact.
  * gives people freedom to experiment instead of telling them what they must do
  * brings complements with it but allows users to implement and modify them
  * principal capabilities include:
    * Facilitating collaboration
    * Allowing expressions of judgment
    * Fostering emergence
* <b>Enterprise IT</b>
  * the type of IT application that companies adopt to restructure interactions among groups of employees or with business partners, such as CRM or SCM
  * Unlike network technologies, which percolate from the bottom, enterprise technologies are very much top-down
  * Companies can’t adopt EIT without introducing new interdependencies, processes, and decision rights.
  * changes become necessary as soon as the new systems go live.
  * EIT’s primary capabilities include:
    * Redesigning business processes
    * Standardizing work flows
    * Monitoring activities and events efficiently
* Across the three IT categories, executives have three tasks:
  * <b>IT selection</b>
    * sensible question for executives to ask is “What do we need IT to do for us?”
    * **An inside-out approach puts the spotlight squarely on the business before evaluating the technology landscape**
    * Once the company’s business needs are clear, the technologies it requires will come into focus
    * Typically, FIT delivers productivity and optimization, NIT increases collaboration, and EIT helps standardize and monitor work
  * <b>IT adoption</b>
    * At this stage, managers’ main responsibility is to help create the complements that will maximize IT’s value.
    * Once network technologies are properly established, their use takes off, and the challenge for managers is to refrain from intervening too often or with too heavy a hand.
    * **In stark contrast to FIT and NIT, enterprise IT is hard for companies to adopt.**
    * benefits look great to people at the top, but employees usually dislike EIT technologies.
    * they don’t just enable new ways of working; they dictate them
    * Executives must intervene forcefully throughout EIT adoption efforts because new processes, changed decision rights, and greater interdependence come hand in hand
    * **the biggest mistake business leaders make is to underestimate resistance**
    * successful EIT adoptions decide at the outset how key issues about configuration and other aspects of the adoption will be raised and how they will be settled
    * most important participants are business leaders from the areas affected by the new technology
  * <b>IT exploitation</b>
    * Companies can best exploit FIT by fine-tuning organizational complements
    * Employees exploit older NITs such as e-mail and instant messaging on their own, but business leaders have a role to play in exploiting newer technologies
    * EIT’s exploitation is often easier than its adoption, since the work of imposing new processes is done by this stage
    * Exploiting EIT sometimes requires adding a new FIT on top of it.
* <b>The IT Dialogue</b>
  * Business and IT leaders should meet periodically to discuss the state of the company’s IT-based capabilities
  * discussions should cover organizational footprints: the geographic, functional, and divisional range over which the company will deploy new technologies
  * The expense, difficulty, and time involved in deploying IT—especially enterprise IT—increases as the footprint grows
  * _Functional IT_
    * Will any of the new software on the market enable our staff to do their jobs more efficiently?
    * Are our function technologies outdated?
  * _Network IT_
    * How do our people collaborate?
    * Do we have ways of letting qualitative information flow horizontally and vertically?
    * If we wanted to get broad feedback on an important topic, how would we do it?
    * How do we know what our people are working on?
  * _Enterprise IT_
    * In what ways are our current processes not supporting the needs of the business?
    * Are there best practices that should be embedded in our enterprise IT endeavors?
    * Are there important business activities, events, or trends that we should monitor?
    * What’s the most recent period that we could easily analyze?
  * **In reality, IT is never a sure bet because of the complex interplay between technologies, capabilities, and complements**
* **For a resource to have an impact on a company’s competitive position, it must be valuable, rare, inimitable, and nonsubstitutable.**
* people often forget that while the software itself might not be any of those things, a successfully implemented system isn’t easy to replicate.
* IT meets all four criteria when a company succeeds in applying a technology and, consequently, gains valuable capabilities.

### Downes, Larry and Nunes, Paul, Big Bang Disruption. Harvard Business Review, March, 2013

* The strategic model of disruptive innovation we’ve all become comfortable with has a blind spot.
* assumes that disrupters start with a lower-priced, inferior alternative that chips away at the least profitable segments, giving an incumbent business time to respond
* That advice hasn’t been much help to navigation-product makers who were decimated by Smartphones running Google Maps
* That kind of innovation changes the rules.
* now entire product lines—whole markets—are being created or destroyed overnight.
* We call these game changers “big-bang disrupters.” They don’t create dilemmas for innovators; they trigger disasters.
* big-bang disruptions are unplanned and unintentional.
* do not follow conventional strategic paths or normal patterns of market adoption.
* while there’s not a lot of evidence yet on how incumbents can survive them, we offer some strategic principles
* perhaps the biggest challenge to incumbents is that big-bang innovations come out of left field, combining existing technologies that don't even seem related to your offerings to achieve a dramatically better value proposition
* <b>Three devastating features</b>
  * _Unencumbered development_
    * innovators are not even trying to disrupt your business. You’re just collateral damage.
    * They are often born of rapid-fire, low-cost experiments on fast-maturing, ubiquitous technology platforms
    * They don’t need budget approval and aren’t vetted before development begins.
    * When cost is low and expectations are modest, entrepreneurs can just launch their idea and see what happens
    * In the future the most successful innovators may be those who simply happen upon the right combination of other people’s technologies.
    * **In the bizarro world of big-bang disrupters, it is perfectly rational to churn out dozens of new products and see which ones take hold.**
  * _Unconstrained growth_
    * Big-bang disruptions collapse the product life cycle we know
    * Now there are only two segments: trial users, who often participate in product development, and everyone else
    * This change obviates the need for the carefully timed shifts in marketing strategy
    * big-bang disruptions can be marketed to every segment simultaneously
    * The new product cycle can be simplified into three basic stages: development, deployment, and replacement
    * in today’s hyperinformed world, each epic failure feeds consumer expectations for the potential of something dramatically better.
    * Waiting for the market to take off and hoping to be a fast follower is now a recipe for irrelevance.
  * _Undisciplined strategy_
    * Big-bang disrupters contradict everything you know about competitive strategy
    * According to Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema’s classic The Discipline of Market Leaders (1995), businesses should align strategic goals along one—and only one—of three value disciplines:
      * low cost (“operational excellence”)
      * constant innovation (“product leadership”)
      * customized offerings (“customer intimacy”)
* Customers are so accustomed to this effect that they are coming to expect every product or service to get cheaper and better with each passing day.
* Under these conditions you can’t win simply by becoming more disciplined with your current strategy.
* Big-bang disrupters are rewriting the rules of industry after industry—and the new rules hold only until the next wave of disruption comes along. There's almost no time to adapt. Bold strategies are the only way to cope.
* Big-bang disruptions usually feature not a _vertically_ integrated supply chain but a _virtually_ integrated one: They are manufactured and deployed via the infrastructure of the cloud.
* Here are four strategies that incumbents have used to survive and even thrive in the face of big-bang disruption:
  * <b>See it coming</b>
    * You need new tools to recognize sooner than your competitors do that radical change is on the way
    * In every industry there are a handful of these visionaries, whose talents are based on equal parts genius and complete immersion in the industry’s inner workings. We call such seers “truth tellers,”
    * finding a truth teller is hard, learning when to listen is even harder.
    * Truth tellers are often eccentric, and their lucidity can easily be mistaken for arrogance and stubbornness
  * <b>Slow the disruptive innovation long enough to better it</b>
    * ensure that disrupters can’t make money from their inventions until you’re ready to acquire them or you can win with a product of your own
    * delay their profitability by lowering prices, locking in customers with long-term contracts, or forming strategic alliances with advertisers and other companies
  * <b>Get closer to the exits, and be ready for a fast escape</b>
    * even long-successful strategies may be suddenly upended, requiring a radical re-creation of the business
    * you have to prepare for immediate evacuation of current markets and be ready to get rid of once-valuable assets.
    * Traditional accounting still has little to say about the value of expertise, brands, patents, and other intangibles
    * For all other kinds of assets, a big-bang disruption can set off a rapid decline in value, making it important not only to shed those technologies but to do so before they become worthless
    * Facing the imminent arrival of a big-bang disrupter, companies must ruthlessly reassess their M&A strategies
    * Once customers shift to the new technology, it’s too late for a graceful exit—at best, it’s time for a fire sale.
  * <b>Try a new kind of diversification</b>
    * As industry change becomes less cyclical and more volatile, having a diverse set of businesses is vital.

### Navigating a World of Digital Disruption: BCG Perspectives: Drivers of New Industrial Architectures. 2015

* digital disruption is not a new phenomenon. But the opportunities and risks it presents shift over time. Competitive advantage flows to the businesses that see and act on those shifts first
* We are entering the third, and most consequential, wave of digital disruption
* In the first wave of the commercial internet, the dot-com era, falling transaction costs altered the traditional trade-off between richness and reach
* In the second wave, Web 2.0, the important strategic insight was that economies of mass evaporated for many activities. Small became beautiful. It was the era of the “long tail” and of collaborative production on a massive scale.
* Now we are on the **cusp of the third wave: hyperscaling.** Big—really big—is becoming beautiful. At the extreme—where competitive mass is beyond the reach of the individual business unit or company—hyperscaling demands a bold, new architecture for businesses.
* Unlike many of his rivals, Bezos saw **business architecture as a strategic variable**, not a given. He did not harness technology to the imperatives of his business model; he **adapted his business model to the possibilities—and the imperatives—of technology.**
* Since larger data sets yield better insights, big is beautiful. Data wants to be big, and businesses struggle to keep up
* The minimum efficient scale for data systems and facilities is rising beyond the reach of individual business units within a company, and ultimately beyond that of many companies
* Polarizing economics of mass are pushing the advantage simultaneously to the very big and the very small, and a new architecture is emerging for businesses of all sizes
* Building a shared data infrastructure will be one of the strategic challenges of the next decade for the health care industry and for policy makers.
* The health care industry is not an anomaly. Economies of “mass”—of scale, scope, and experience—are intensifying across the economy, driving new models of collaboration
* technologies can be extended infinitely and are all converging on the instantaneous
* Modularity and layering, granularity and extensibility, the symbiosis of the very large with very small: these are the recurrent themes of the transformative technologies of our era
* businesses in most industries have a classic oligopolistic structure, with a small number of companies competing on similar vertical value chains. In many cases, this will evolve into a much more diverse architecture of horizontal layers: infrastructure on the bottom, communities on the top, and traditional oligopolists in the middle.
* Stacks are a compelling model when the benefits of innovation at the top and higher utilization at the bottom exceed the additional transaction costs incurred by breaking up value chains.
* In the right circumstances, a stacked ecosystem blows up the classic trade-off between efficiency and innovation.
* what cannot be emphasized too much are the _differences_ among these four types of activity. They require different skills and motives, present different financial profiles to investors, and
need to be managed on different time horizons
* disruption takes very specific forms, and these forms are shifting
* leaders must adapt their strategies to the possibility of infrastructure that extends beyond the bounds of the business, to data that wants to be big
* Conventional business models may be simultaneously too big and too small.
* How should executives respond? Here are the four major drivers of the new industrial architecture and the key strategic imperatives for companies:
  * <b>Big data</b>
    * Test your current analytics against the state of the art. The field is moving so quickly that even the most well-versed companies can fall behind
    * Organizations capable of all this will be ones in which business managers, programmers, and mathematicians talk each other’s languages, where small teams iterate in fast cycles, where empirical validation counts for more than judgments of hierarchies or senior executives
    * Consolidate databases across the company.
    * Form partnerships to gain scale.
    * Manage data as a trustee
  * <b>Deconstruction</b>
    * Reorganize your business along its economic fault lines
    * Look for opportunities to be the lateral aggressor
    * Identify where your value chain is most susceptible to lateral attack
  * <b>Polarization of Economies of Mass</b>
    * “Up-source” activities to a community.
    * "Down-source" activities to shared infrastructure
  * <b>Holistic, Stacked Architectures</b>
    * Curate a new industrial stack.
    * Where you can’t curate your own stack, seek advantaged roles in stacks curated by others
    * Reshape regulation. Companies have a huge stake in how this thinking evolves, can and should influence policy in directions that favor efficiency at the bottom of the stack and open innovation at the top

### How to Create a Great Digital Strategy, CISR Research Briefing, Ross et al 2016

* SMACIT (social, mobile, analytics, cloud, and Internet of Things)
* A digital strategy is a business strategy inspired by the capabilities of powerful, readily accessible technologies (like SMACIT), intent on delivering unique, integrated business capabilities that are responsive to constantly changing market conditions.
* three characteristics of an effective digital strategy:
  * focused on building one clear competitive strength
  * directional rather than targeted
  * enabled by existing or readily developed digital capabilities
* one of two digital strategies:
  * <b>customer engagement</b>
    * transforms a company's go-to-market approach
    * strategic focus is on creating loyalty and trust
    * superior, innovative, personalized customer experiences
    * the goal is customer loyalty, so you'll need to constantly raise your game as you identify new opportunities to connect
  * <b>digitized solutions</b>
    * transforms a company's business model by reformulating what the company is selling
    * enhance products and services with information or expertise to help solve customer problems. The strategic focus of a digitized solutions strategy is adding value to customers
    * digitized solutions often change a business model by moving the revenue stream from the sale of an asset to recurring revenue from the sale of a sophisticated service.
* Digitized solutions strategies and customer engagement strategies address two different types of digital disruption, product development vs. go-to-market
* research suggests that companies must focus on one of these strategies to drive their transformation
* both customer engagement and digitized solution strategies require business integration
* A great digital strategy adopts a kind of start-up mentality about business success
* addresses a perceived customer need as a starting point
* adapt the strategy based on market response, seizing additional opportunities that present themselves. Because market response cannot be predicted, your digital strategy must be directional rather than targeting a given end state
* The success of digital strategies depends on your ability to execute flawlessly
* An operational backbone is essential to delivering this kind of consistency
* in most industries, operational excellence is table stakes for competing in the digital economy
* Defining a digital strategy is an essential first step
* starts with clear thinking about both the opportunities and risks that new digital technologies pose
* Then it requires constant adaptation as new opportunities emerge
* The toughest challenge in achieving digital business success, however, is not defining a strategy. It's executing the strategy
* the operational backbone will not provide the agility you need
* Start designing a digital services backbone to enable a constant flow of digital innovations and connections with partners

## MNGPO

### Chapter 8, Managing Nonprofit Organizations, Tschirhart and Bielefeld (2012)

* Marketing starts with the nonprofit’s mission and strategies and relates the organization to customers, clients, and others that it seeks to provide benefits to or influence
*  The notion of marketing as a distinct business process, however, was only developed in the twentieth century and the most recent ideas about the nature of marketing were developed in the 1950s
* formal expansion of marketing ideas to nonprofits began in the late 1960s
* Three orientations toward marketing can be identified:  
  * _product or service orientation_ - this orientation focused on the more efficient manufacture and distribution of the goods and services
  * _sales orientation_ - focused on persuading customers to buy a particular organization’s products or services instead of those of its competitor
  * _marketing orientation, or customer orientation_ - shifts to the needs of the customer (sometimes also called the target audience or market)
* The notion of joint value creation for both the consumer and the organization makes the marketing orientation quite compatible with the missions and activities of nonprofit organizations
* Nonprofit marketing, like marketing in for-profits, relies on the marketing mix to accomplish its goals. The marketing mix is composed of the four P’s: _product, promotion, price, and place_
* Most nonprofits serve multiple constituencies and therefore have multiple objectives, the most important of these objectives may be nonfinancial
* deciding on goals must often involve compromise and consensus building
* it may be difficult to measure for nonfinancial goals
* In many nonprofits there are two separate constituencies: those who subsidize the organization (such as donors) and those who will use or benefit from the nonprofit’s services
* effective result is that there are two target markets
* both markets must be taken into account in marketing plans and program
* may result in tensions between mission and customer satisfaction.
* Most nonprofits provide _services_ as opposed to tangible products
* some nonprofits produce neither products nor services but seek instead to change some form of _social behavior_ for the better
* In both the product and sales orientations described earlier, marketing begins with the organization and what it wants to offer the customer
* Although the discussion is often about these marketing functions, the larger, philosophical significance of marketing for keeping a focus on the nonprofit’s mission should not be overlooked.
* A nonprofit with a product or sales orientation will believe that its products or services are inherently desirable. Numerous consequences follow:
  * lack of success is attributed to target audience ignorance or lack of motivation
  * Marketing research is given a minor role
  * Marketing’s job is seen primarily as promotion
* A marketing orientation, in contrast, holds that the only way a nonprofit can achieve its own goals is by satisfying the needs of its target market.
  * To do this the nonprofit will need to completely understand that target market
  * necessitate planning the marketing program as a whole and coordinating all its elements
  * marketing must be closely integrated with the other activities of the nonprofit
  * Heavy reliance will be placed on marketing research
* The development and maintenance of a marketing orientation requires continuous attention to marketing
* Nonprofits need to continuously monitor, assess, and react
* a marketing cycle that embodies the customer orientation
  * Define or redefine the market
  * Answer the question, What does the market want?
  * Shape or reshape the products or services
  * Set prices for, promote, and distribute the offerings
  * Evaluate the results of the marketing program
  * Start over
* In order to be effective, the marketing cycle needs to be embedded in and supported by a planning framework
* strategic marketing plan will:
  * evaluate the nonprofit’s environment and current marketing program
  * set future marketing goals
  * develop strategies and tactics for reaching these goals
* marketing planning should be consistent with and build upon the nonprofit’s mission, vision, and overall strategic plan
* good place for marketing planning to start is with the findings and conclusions of the internal and external analyses prepared for the overall strategic plan
* Setting marketing goals, strategies, and tactics can be complex for nonprofits because their marketing may be aimed (sometimes simultaneously) at current or future customers or clients, donors or other funders, or volunteers
* Marketing planning, decision making, and control need to be based on accurate information
* The need for information may, in fact, be greater for nonprofits than for for-profits
* A nonprofit needs a system that routinely collects, analyzes, stores, and disseminates relevant marketing information
* a marketing information, or knowledge, system will provide information to key decision makers and, ideally, will have several subsystems.
  * An _internal reports subsystem_ collects information from data sources within the nonprofit
  * A _marketing intelligence subsystem_ collects information from routinely available public source
  * _analytical marketing subsystem_ organizes general data, performs needed analysis, and provides reports
* Marketing research is problem oriented and can be defined as the design, collection, analysis, and reporting of reliable marketing information that is relevant to a particular problem
* To accomplish this, the marketing research process goes through a series of steps:
  * <b>Problem Identification and Research Objectives</b>
    * it is critical that the right question be asked. This may seem simple, but it might turn out to be quite complex
    * matter of identifying the most important factors in a marketing situation and the related questions that must be answered.
    * some preliminary information or exploratory research may be useful or necessary
  * <b>Research Plan Formulation</b>
    * When research objectives have been set, a research plan can be established
    * The plan will establish the type of information needed to address the research, where those data can be obtained, and the most appropriate data acquisition and analysis strategies
    * It will lay out the steps to be taken
  * <b>Data Collection and Analysis</b>
    * Once the research plan has been specified, standard social science data acquisition and analysis techniques can be used
    * Data can be composed of numbers (quantitative data) or words and descriptions (qualitative data)
    * Analysis can range from simple displays and summaries of the data to complex statistically based findings that predict future behavior
    * nonprofits that lack qualified staff may employ technically trained consultants
  * <b>Interpretation and Reporting of Finding</b>
    * interpretations of the findings are compiled and reported so that they can be the basis of strategies to successfully address the marketing problem
    * marketing research can be an extensive, time-consuming, and (by implication) possibly expensive process
    * Research is at the heart of the marketing orientation that nonprofits need to adopt. A marketing plan is only as good as the research and data it is based on
* A _marketing audit_ will answer the question, Where are we now?
* consist of detailed reviews of internal and external factors
* Consideration should be given not only to the current state of these factors but also to their future change and development
* External analysis can be used to gather information on the general environment, including important political, economic, environmental, sociocultural, and technological factors (PEST analysis)
* A nonprofit may have gathered this type of information as part of its strategic planning
* should however now be examined for its particular relevance for marketing
* an analysis of competitors, collaborators, and stakeholders should be carried out
* The competitive environment will include other organizations providing similar or substitute products or services.
* An internal analysis will assess the nonprofit’s own marketing activity and its marketing strengths and weaknesses.
* Five areas should be assessed:
  * Trends
  * Share of market
  * Stability
  * Efficiency
  * Flexibility
* In addition, the nonprofit should examine its current marketing activities and the resources it has to carry out these and future marketing efforts
* assess the degree to which marketing contributes to the nonprofit’s mission and to its competitive advantage or disadvantage
* The marketing audit will generate a large amount of information
* A number of analytical tools are available to compile this information
* two techniques—the product life cycle and portfolio analysis.
  * <b>Product life cycle</b>
    * The product life cycle is based on the idea that products and services pass through predictable usage stages
      * Marketing research is used at the _development_ stage
      * _Introduction_ stage, raising awareness is of key importance
      * During the latter stages of _growth_ and during _maturity_, competitors are starting to emerge and marketing is oriented toward differentiating the offering
      * During the _decline_ stage, there may be a more limited role for marketing
    * <b>Portfolio analysis</b>
      * A portfolio analysis considers the main products, services, or programs of a nonprofit
      * MacMillan framework considers three dimensions: program attractiveness, competitive position, and alternative coverage
* Once a nonprofit has analyzed its current situation, It is in a position to set marketing objectives and goals and then strategies and tactics to achieve them.
* marketing objectives should be aligned with the organization’s overall strategic objectives
* should also be consistent with the objectives of key units of the organization
* Once objectives have been established, marketing strategies will express, in general terms, what the nonprofit’s broad approach to meeting its marketing objectives will be
* important to analyze the _competitive environment_
* three strategic options for competition:
  * _differentiation strategy_ entails offering something that few or no others offer
  * _cost strategy_ entails seeking to be the lowest-cost provider in the market
  * _focus strategy_ leads the nonprofit to select a limited market segment and provide a unique offering
* _market segmentation_ involves identifying groups of potential consumers based on some meaningful criteria
* criteria that may be used for segmentation:
  * Demographic criteria
  * Geographical criteria
  * Product or service criteria
  * Psychographic criteria
* _Targeting_ uses a variety of basic criteria to evaluate segments
* Most important, the segment should fit with the mission of the nonprofit and, given its present and future capabilities, the nonprofit should then be able to develop a marketing mix that will appeal to the segment
* characteristics of the segment should be measurable and distinct enough to differentiate it
  * its members should be accessible
  * segment should be large enough to justify a marketing effort
  * behavior of people in the segment stable enough for planning purposes
* broad strategic targeting choices:
  * Undifferentiated (mass) marketing
  * Differentiated marketing
  * Concentrated marketing
  * Mass customization
* _Positioning_ involves creating and maintaining an image of an organization’s offering,
* Nonprofit marketers need to understand which dimensions their target audiences use to evaluate the nonprofit’s offering and to compare it to others
* Positioning can be used strategically to help a nonprofit build on its present strengths, search for a market niche, or reposition the competition
* The following process can be used to develop and choose among positional alternatives:
  * Determine the factors that are important to each market segment
  * Survey the market to uncover the current positions of each competitive offering
  * Create a perceptual map for each segment of interest
  * Analyze the alternative attractive positions
  * Decide what position is most strategically beneficial
  * Create an integrated marketing program
* It is necessary to determine which factors are important in order to design marketing programs appropriately
* nonprofits often deal with multiple constituencies
* likely that different constituencies will use different dimensions
* When different constituencies are important, positioning must be considered for each
* unlikely that a nonprofit can excel on every dimension
* the position that a nonprofit decides to strive for will, most likely, involve trade-off
* _branding_ is defined as "a name, term, design, symbol, or any other feature that identifies one seller’s good or service as distinct"
* A nonprofit’s brand is a way for the public to identify and recognize the nonprofit
* Ideally brands will be memorable, meaningful, likable, transferable, adaptable (meaning that their use can be extended and customized), and legally protectable
* designed to influence perceptions and convey complex psychological and emotional messages about the nonprofit
* A nonprofit’s brand, therefore, both reflects the nonprofit’s mission and unique social contribution
* Developing a brand involves defining what is distinctive about the nonprofit and what it does and why the nonprofit deserves consideration
* Successful branding can lead to these benefits:
  * Differentiation
  * Enhanced performance
  * Reputation insurance
  * Enhanced loyalty
  * Partnerships
* Branding may require complex planning and implementation
* depends on the consistency of all other communication the nonprofit has
* behavior in all elements and at all levels of the nonprofit must reinforce the brand
* may be difficult in large or geographically dispersed nonprofit
* formulating tactics, which uses the four elements of the marketing mix—the four P’s
  * <b>Product</b>
    * product is usually the first consideration, parameters will shape or determine the other elements
    * The use of the term product in the marketing mix comes from for-profit marketing
    * For nonprofits, the meaning of the product category in the marketing mix must be expanded to include services and program
    * Some nonprofits carry out marketing programs aimed at changing behaviors, termed _social marketing_
    * _Products_
      * Products are tangible items delivered to recipients in target markets
      * nonprofit’s mix of products can be described and strategically manipulated in terms of:
        * length, width, and depth (number of product lines, number of basic offerings, variety of offerings)
        * mission relevance
        * ability to attract customers, or patrons
      * Products designed to play a major role in attracting patrons are called _product leaders_ or _flagship products_
    * _Services_
      * Services have a number of distinguishing features:
        * _Intangibility_ - do not exist until they are consumed
        * _Perishability_ - cannot be produced in advance
        * _Simultaneity_ - produced and consumed at the same time
        * _Heterogeneity_ - quality will vary
      * marketing services requires different approaches than marketing products does
      * key issue is the assurance of quality
      * critically important to understand what a target market’s perceptions of service quality and what they are based on
      * may require obtaining information from target audience members
      * Once such information is obtained, however, a nonprofit can then develop objective measures of service quality and monitor its performance
    * _Social Marketing_
      * Social marketing refers to an attempt to change some form of social behavior
      * Social marketing emerged as a distinct concept in the early 1970s
      * Social marketing seeks to have target markets do one of four things
          * accept a new beneficial behavior
          * reject a potentially undesirable behavior
          * modify a current behavior
          * abandon an old undesirable behavior
        * Social marketing has a number of unique features and challenges
          * audiences may be indifferent to the issues
          * may not see any direct personal benefits
          * behavior may involve controversial topics
          * may actually be opposed to the behavioral change
        * Change will be more difficult when people are highly involved in the behavior, when the behavior is continual (rather than occurring a few times), and when the behavior is exhibited by groups
        * Currently, social marketing campaigns rely heavily on the Internet
          * Offline behavioral change activities should translate to the online environment
          * an organization must understand the audience members’ online habits
          * Interactive advertising and marketing promotions on complementary Web sites can drive traffic
          * Nonpaid partnerships with complementary sites are valuable
    * <b>Promotion</b>
      * Promotion is communication to the market about the availability and benefits of the service or product
      * It is important to recognize that promotion is a form of communication
      * goes beyond thinking solely about the wording of an advertisement
      * To be effective, promotion must take all aspects of the communication process into account.
      * An understanding of the receiver will suggest the decoding process that he or she will use and the potential for interpretations
      * a consistent style or tone needs to be established by using appropriate symbols.
      * Marketers also need to decide on the tools they will use to deliver promotion, referred to as the _promotional mix_
        * major option in this mix is _paid advertising_
        * might also be possible for a nonprofit to get its services or programs featured in a _public service announcement (PSA)_
        * Another option is _sales promotion_. Sales promotions provide short-term incentives designed to stimulate demand, has some downsides
        * More directed methods for promotion may also be used. The most common of these is _direct mail_
        * The most recent development is the growth of _electronic formats_ for promotion
    * <b>Price</b>
      * Pricing for nonprofits involves a number of complexities that for-profits do not normally encounter. The missions of nonprofits involve nonfinancial goals
      * there may be multiple ways of pursuing a mission and these may entail incompatible ramifications for pricing.
      * prices should not be charged if doing so will threaten the mission or if beneficiaries will have significant difficulties paying
      * a pricing strategy can be established to accomplish a number of different objectives:
        * maximizing profitability
        * cover the cost of production
        * maximize market share
        * Considerations of social equity
      * three approaches to setting prices:
        * cost of producing
        * user demand
        * competition
    * <b>Place</b>
      * addresses the question of how the product, service, or program is made available
      * Two basic aspects of distribution channels are
        * the design of the physical and logistical details of the channel
        * the performance of the channel in meeting the needs and desires of the target market
      * _direct distribution_ - control all aspects of getting the service, product, or program to the user
      * _indirect distribution_ - specialized intermediaries to fulfill some of the distribution function
      * Another important decision in distribution channel design is how many locations will be used and what will be available at each location
      * Three options:
        * Convenience
        * shopping
        * specialty
      * nonprofit can choose a location pattern that is most economical for the organization
      * A second broad concern is the way in which the distribution channel affects the target market’s experience, called the _buying experience_
      * Another factor is the _atmosphere_ of the place of delivery

### Chapter 11, Managing Nonprofit Organizations, Tschirhart and Bielefeld (2012)

* human resource management considerations should be integrated into strategic planning processes, evaluation practices, and decision making on budgets and action plans
* _Human resource capacity_ refers to the abilities, experience, and talent of the people who conduct the work of the organization internally
* HR capacity may also incorporate contingent workers
  * Contingent workers include consultants, independent contractors, freelancers, temporary contract workers hired through an external labor firm, student interns, loaned executives, workers paid with government stipends
* Strategic HR management provides managers with tools and techniques to motivate their workers and to reduce risk
* Key questions are: Which tasks should be contracted out and which performed in-house? and, What types of workers should be recruited for the tasks—for example, should they be paid or volunteer?
* To assess HR capacity, nonprofi t leaders need a clear understanding of what current workers are able and willing to do
* **list the main tasks that need to be done in the organization and match each task to the abilities required to perform it**
* conduct an _abilities inventory_
* Typically, only large, well-resourced nonprofits have the time and dollars to conduct sophisticated
forecasting of demands for services. However, even the smallest nonprofits can track when their services are being used and determine whether demand is exceeding capacity
* All nonprofits can look for environmental changes that may lead to significant increases or decreases in service demand
* sampling of factors that can affect service demand:
  * Economic Conditions
  * Population and Demographic Shifts
  * Realization of Mission
  * Natural Environment
  * Other Actors in the Service Network
  * External Funding and Government Reimbursement Policies
  * Technological and Cultural Shifts
* <b>Forecasting HR Capacity Needs</b>
  * Key questions:
    * What skills and knowledge will be needed to meet our strategic goals?
    * What kinds of workers and how many of them are needed?
    * What new jobs will be needed, and what existing jobs will no longer be needed?
    * Can our current workforce fill the needed jobs?
    * How successful are we likely to be in retaining current workers?
    * What do we need to do to develop workers for these jobs?
    * Do we have enough managers and trainers to develop and support the workers?
    * Are our current HR resources and practices adequate for future needs?
  * capacity-building decisions should be informed by an understanding of what each type of worker is likely to be able to provide and what resources will be needed to manage
* <b>The Cycle of Involvement</b>
  * Effective human resource management has multiple activities. These activities can be categorized by their place in the cycle of involvement
  * Stage 1: Initial Involvement
    * four activities: determining the rationale for new workers, attracting candidates, screening and selecting new workers, and establishing written and psychological contracts.
  * Stage 2: Development
    * Basic development activities, which can be repeated throughout an individual’s time with a nonprofit, include socializing, measuring performance, identifying developmental needs, sharing feedback, and providing learning opportunities.
  * Stage 3: Maintenance
    * Examples of these activities are providing compensation and benefits, recognizing and rewarding workers, facilitating a productive and safe work environment, and keeping records and submitting paperwork.
  * Stage 4: Separation
    * The goal of the nonprofit should be to have amicable separations, where workers feel fairly treated and have good feelings toward the organization
      * Understand Reasons for Separation
      * Possibly Renegotiate Position
* the success of any organization depends on having the right people, in the right place, doing the right things
* Good HR management is about aligning workers to the mission

### Brown, Chapter 4

* Part of how nonprofits fulfill priorities is by providing value to significant stakeholders
* There is no long-term advantage to meeting stakeholder interests in ways that can be easily provided by others
* nonprofit value frameworks, which depicts the resource portfolio, management functions, and program activities working together
* three parts to the nonprofit value framework:
  * resource portfolio
  * management functions
  * program activities
* key principles of comparative advantage, or as conceptualized in the corporate strategy, "competitive advantage"
* The idea of competitive advantage can be somewhat controversial in a nonprofit context, as the sector was founded on concepts of cooperation and collaboration
* organizations need to be clear on what they bring to a collaborative relationship and how their contribution is unique
* comparative advantage defines an organization's capabilities in relation to other providers
* Acquiring, integrating, and lever­aging resources to build a comparative advantage is central to organizational sustainability
* There are several features that make resources strategi­cally viable
  * _Value_ of a resource - two ideas are of particular concern: Can the nonprofit easily use the resource to support strategic priorities and is the resource/asset unique?
  * _comparative advantage_ - Managers should consider such things as the extent to which the resources are _rare_, _costly to imitate_, and _substitutable_
* The utilization or integration of resources is considered a _capability_
* Considering the nonprofit value frame­ work, managers need to:
  * first coordinate organizational features to produce programs
  * program outcomes need to produce social value
  * public benefits must be valued by influential stakeholders
* Identifying and building core competencies that create such value is a critical task
* cre­ate core competencies that are a mix of resources, management functions, and public benefit activities
* **core competencies are difficult for others to replicate**
* management literature suggests that an organization can build and maintain only a select number of core competencies (three to five)
* <b>Resource portfolio</b>
  * Beyond these relatively tangible resources are assets that are important but less concrete, such as reputation, external relationships, and capacity to innovate
  * _Human capital_
    * Human capital is the sum of individuals engaged in the work
    * A typical nonprofit with paid staff will often allocate 70-80% of the budget to compensation
    * The degree to which these human capital characteristics are rare depends on the unique skillsets and capabilities of organizational participants
    * Leadership is another key concept of human capital
    * Leadership is part vision, part message, and part influence
  * _Financial assets_
  * _Information and Innovation_
    * Creating and producing innovative products is costly and risky
    * Effective evaluation is built on a reliable and accurate information management system
    * Information and innovation management practices are a resource for many nonprofits
    Nonprofits are a source of innovation, and philosophical principles of cooperation and collaboration encourage nonprofits to share those innovations
  * _Relationships_
    * Knowledge and awareness facilitate the ability to nurture relationships, but in practice, relationship management goes beyond accurate record keeping
    * Nonprofits are particularly sensitive to the social context
    * Nonprofits operate in economic and social markets
    * Managing and developing relationships creates social capital. Social capital recognizes the inherent value of relationships
    * Two types of social capital are:
      * _bonding relationships_ - tend to be deeper and more socially homogeneous, tend to bring access to resources
      * _bridging relationships_ - extend to more distant actors and more heterogeneous, facilitates sharing, integration, and utilization of resources
    * Within the organization, healthy relationships facilitate information sharing and learning
    * supervisory/subordinate relationships are enhanced when those involved trust and respect each other
    * organizational cultures and norms are enacted, created, and shared through effective relationships
    * effective control and monitoring practices are facilitated by organizational relationships
    * external connections tend to reflect bridging relationships that can result in increased access to resources and ease partnerships
    * It is difficult to assess the level of social capital that exists in an organization. Assessment typically entails looking at the nature and character of relationships across various stakeholder groups
    * Relationship or stakeholder management then becomes a core function to create social capital
    * In principle, healthy relationships, rich in social capital, are difficult to replicate and thereby can provide tremendous strategic advantage
  * _Reputation_
    * Reputation is another "soft" asset that is difficult to quantify and create, but it offers significant benefits
    * Reputation, like social capital, is a fairly complex idea but in principle it entails three componenets:
      * name recognition (awareness)
      * an overall impression of the organization
      * for some stakeholders, judgements on how it does
    * Perceptions and thereby reputation can be idiosyncratic to different individuals or stakeholder groups
    * **General management guidance suggests that positive reputations take a long time to develop and can be lost much more quickly**
    * The idea of name recognition or "being known" is similar in many ways to brand recognition or awareness
    * Most recognized organizations tend to be national in scope, having long histories of providing services, and tend to have extensive networks of local affiliates
    * Organizations should have a sense should have a sense of what stakeholders expect from them and what they value, because this can be an issue if expectations are too high
    * Research suggests that reputation is positively associated with a number of desirable outcomes
    * Increased recognition and awareness also might lead to high expectations and potentially increased scrutiny
    * many stakeholders look beyond these messages and make informed judgments about actual performance
    * Reputation is socially constructed
    * As stakeholders learn about the organization and what it does they build expectations, and the organization must consider its capacity to support the impressions of stakeholders
    * consistency in organizational practices is very critical to reputation management as it simplifies the "message" of what the organization does and how it acts
* Organizational systems exploit the resource portfolio to fulfill public benefit functions
* How and to what extent the interplay is enacted is a critical and significant organizational advantage
* Using the competing values framework, management functions can be clustered into four general areas
* The framework organizes tasks by considering four diametrically opposed features:
  * internal versus external orientations
  * control versus flexibility structures
* Internal orientations reflect the needs of coordinating elements inside the organization, whereas external orientations reflect the interface between the organization and the external environment
* Control versus flexibility perspective balances the need to be responsive to individuals and opportunities while building consistency and stability
* The four functional areas are related to the nonprofit value framework
* The NVF facilitates identification of key internal components that must be coordinated to achieve objectives
* Managing people is a mix of structural systems that facilitate coordination while also developing relationships that support professional development and engagement.
Measures of performance include concepts of engagement, commitment, and satisfaction.
* Internal process tasks are those activities that are more internal and control oriented
* Includes aspects of the information technology infrastructure, but also accounting procedures and the like
* Open systems tasks reflect an orientation toward the external environment and tend to require more flexible structures that facilitate learning and innovation
* Goal and production tasks are those activities focused on the service beneficiary and attending to meeting the public benefit goals of the organization
* Given the complexity of the nonprofit sector, it is difficult to easily distill practices
* **Ultimately, managers try to define a limited set of core systems that are strategically optimal. That is, managers nurture organization system that provide distinctive value to stakeholders**
* critical concern is the extent to which public benefit activities create social value that is appreciated by key stakeholders 
